Now that we've
talked about the map
family of intermediate
operations,
let's turn our attention to
filter and flatMap, which
have some interesting
similarities and even more
interesting differences
compared to the map family
of intermediate operations.
So filter and flatMap,
like map and mapToInt,
are also both stateless,
run-to-completion operations.
So let's go ahead
first and start
by covering the filter
intermediate operation.
So the filter
intermediate operation
is passed a predicate, and
it tests that predicate
against each element
of its input stream
and returns an
output stream that
contains only the elements
that match the predicate.
So of course, if
everything matches,
it will get back
the same number.
But if not everything
matches, it'll
return less than the number.
So one of the first obvious
differences between filter
and map is that, unlike map--
which had the same number
of elements in the output stream
as it had in its input stream--
filter may have
less than the number
of input stream elements
in its output stream
than came into its input stream.
Now, of course, it might
have the same number
if the predicate
matches everything.
But if it doesn't match,
then it'll be less.
We use this particular
intermediate operation
to filter out any
empty search results.
So after searching for a
given word in an input string,
if there's just
no matches at all,
rather than keeping around
a search result object that
has nothing in it, we're
going to filter out and remove
anything that's empty.
So that's what's shown
here in the example.
So visually, you can see we
go potentially from a larger
number of search
results to a smaller
number of search results
wherever things are empty.
One thing to note, however--
and this is a key difference,
another key difference between
filter and map in addition
to having potential differences
in the number of output
elements--
filter can't change the type
or the value of the elements
it processes.
So if it comes in as a
stream of search results,
it's going to go out as a
stream of search results.
There will not be any
change in the type.
There could be a
reduction in the number,
but no change in that type
is allowed with filter.
And that's, again, very
different from map.
Here's, again, how we use
our fluent interface model.
We take the output of
search for a word, which
is what map applied, and then
we go ahead and connect it up
with filter.
And you can see
what filter does is
it checks to see if the
element is empty by calling
the isEmpty method
reference, and then we
use basically a negator method
here called not which I wrote,
which is very similar to
the negate method that's
defined on predicate.
And what you can do here
is basically we're saying,
only allow things through
that are not empty.
That's the way to read this.
So not isEmpty means
not empty, or full,
or has an element--
has at least one
matching search result. Let
those things go through.
Otherwise, drop them.
So that's filter.
Let's now talk about flatMap.
FlatMap is a very
powerful operation,
and it's also quite interesting.
What it does is it
returns a stream that
replaces each element
of its input stream
with the contents of a map
stream, which is produced
by applying the provided
mapping function
to each element of the stream.
Now, that's pretty much straight
out of the box-- straight out
of the book, straight out
of the documentation--
for what flatMap does.
If I was you, I'd
be going, hmm, I'm
not quite sure what
the heck that means.
So let me see if I
can break it down.
At one level, it sounds an
awful lot like map, in that,
it's applying some
mapper function.
But it's actually quite
different in reality,
and so we'll kind of take a look
and see how we could use it.
One of the things to
note about flatMap,
which is really quite
different from map,
is that the number of
elements in the output stream
can be greater than,
equal to, or less
than the number of elements
in the input stream.
So it's the most
different of them
all, and we'll see how this
shakes out as things go on.
This particular
example here is kind of
interesting because
what it does is
it's going to take a
stream of lists of strings.
So we have a stream
of lists of strings,
and then it's going
to call flatMap.
And what that does is it
flattens the list of strings
into--
it flattens the array
of lists of strings
into a stream of strings.
So rather than having a
stream of lists of strings--
which is what we would
get if we used map--
instead, what flatMap
does is it ends up
flattening the elements, kind of
concatenating them all together
so we end up with
a stream of strings
which have been flattened--
kind of run over by a bulldozer.
You'll see me use a bulldozer
metaphor a lot of times
when we talk about flatMap.
Like map, flatMap is able to
transform the type of elements
it processes.
In this particular
case, you can see
that we took a stream
of lists of strings
and turned them into
a stream of strings.
And so that's a good example
of the powerful things
you can do with flatMap.
Here's just a little
snippet of code kind of show
what this might look like.
This example is not really found
in my simple search stream app
case study.
So instead, I show an
example here in ex12 folder
on my GitHub account.
And you can see here what
we do is we basically make
a whole bunch of
lists of strings.
I haven't really
shown them here,
but you can imagine
they'd be initialized
with lists of strings using
Arrays.asList or whatever.
And then we go ahead
and say Stream.of.
That takes the array, turns
it into a stream of lists
of strings, and then we call
flatMap with the List::stream
method and that goes ahead--
it's a method reference--
and that goes ahead and converts
this into a stream of strings,
which is pretty cool.